Good afternoon, welcome, sorry, officials, uh,
to the, uh, select committee.
Um, this afternoon we are looking at the essence
of appropriations of Vote, internal Affairs
and respons for each of the minister
of the community voluntary sector.
Uh, so with that, um, we wish to, uh,
make some open statements then
Questions. Great. Uh, thank you Mr.
Chair. And, uh, colleagues.
Just want to, uh, introduce Paul James, who's the Secretary
of Internal Affairs.
Um, Claire Turki is the General Manager
of community operations at the table.
Um, you may not have met Ani Lambert, who is the Deep sec,
uh, partnerships and commissions.
Uh, Rachel Otta has recently joined DIA
as the Deputy Secretary of Regulatory and Identity Services.
Um, and we have John Sned as the general manager
of regulatory services and Jane Beggs as policy director.
Um, so I'm really proud of the diverse range of work that,
um, the ministry does, um, the staff, the team do.
Um, but really if we think about
what makes us a more connected, um, society, it's very much
through the community and voluntary sector.
Uh, it also plays a really important part
of our economic wellbeing as well as our social wellbeing
with a contribution, um,
of nearly $4 billion to the economy.
Um, we've got about 115,000 not-for-profit organizations,
approximately 20 thou, 29,000 registered charities.
Um, and if you think about those numbers,
they touch New Zealanders lives, um, every day,
often when people are in their greatest time of need.
And of course, they also, um, help ensure
that we have a wonderful country and environment as well.
So over half of New Zealanders volunteer their time, energy,
and skills to support causes that they care about.
Um, and it's that generosity that makes our country
as fantastic as it is.
So as a government, we continue to support the crucial work
of the sector through a range of crown funded initiatives.
I've got a number of priorities.
Uh, one is growing philanthropic giving.
We want to make it easier to give.
We want to support the sector to identify and meet needs,
and also to ensure that we have the greatest impact
with the resources available.
Um, supporting volunteering is one of my priorities.
Um, and of course we are in, um,
national Volunteer Awareness Month.
We've just finished, um, national Volunteers Week,
but this is the big shout out month.
Um, so I just want to thank each and every one of you.
I know mps, um, particularly champion in raise awareness
for National Volunteering Week,
and the big shout out, um, campaign, which is of course, uh,
a very small but significant thing we can all do
in our roles to support, um,
and, uh, acknowledge volunteers.
So, um, big shout out campaigns and, uh, ends in five days.
So let's make sure we make these next five days count.
Another priority is, uh, making sure that community grants
and funding are targeted for maximum, um, impact.
And there are a number of crown funded schemes
that deliver crucial support
for a wide range of communities.
Iwi and hapu.
One of course that we are all aware
of is the community organization's grant scheme,
commonly known as cogs, um,
which provides approximately 3000 grants
to community organizations annually.
Uh, we also provide really important support
to volunteering New Zealand, uh,
and it's 18 regional, uh, volunteer centers
with guaranteed funding.
Um, part of our job really is to also work closely
with business and community to understand those needs, um,
so that we can ensure that Crown funding is going
to where it's needed most.
Um, but we also want to ensure that, um,
business phase its part
because we can have the best impact when government,
business and community are aligned.
So, um, thank you Mr. Chair.
And with that, I welcome any questions you've
got. Oh, thank you,
Minister. I think that big shout out
to our voluntary sector.
Um, first question, Helen,
Thank you. Um,
I am really pleased to hear you, um,
talking about the value of this work,
and I think we'd share that view across the house.
Um, what I wanna know about, um, first of all is we had, um,
a proposal that looks like it's been, um, put off a bit,
but it's about taxing charities.
And I was really concerned about some
of the language we heard around that these are the groups
that do so much for our community and for so little,
and with volunteer hours.
And we had Nicola Willis, um, talking about, um,
those charities as if they were avoiding tax when most
of them are not avoiding tax.
Um, what conversations did you have with the sector about
that issue and, um, the approach that at
that point Nicola was taking?
I'll just remind you, um, if you want to, um,
know what she said.
Um, so she had, uh,
she was pretty disparaging in her words.
She talked about, um, the avoidance of attacks and, um,
and made it sound like people were getting around
that by charities. Yes.
So firstly, I, I disagree with the way
that member characterizes, um, the Minister
of Finances statements.
Um, so clearly, while I'm not responsible
for the taxation settings of charities, um,
the question you've asked is around, you know, what,
what feedback I've had.
Uh, and you know, one of the, one of the priorities for me
around growing philanthropic giving is very much based on,
uh, people having trusting confidence
in the charitable sector
and where there is a tax obligation, um, it's paid.
And so I don't see it as a significant issue.
Um, but what I do want to ensure is
that when people are considering giving,
whether it's payroll giving in their, in their weekly pay,
uh, or whether it's a large entity making a donation
to a charitable organization, we want to ensure
and give the public confidence, um, that there isn't, uh,
an organization out there
or a few organizations that have a structure
other than the intent of the charitable purpose.
So I, I'm, I'm pleased that, uh, the ministers
who are responsible for this work, um,
are looking at the issue.
I think it's important, uh, by also taking time
to understand what is the size of the problem,
the scope of the problem.
Um, and what I want to ensure is that, you know,
with the priority of growing philanthropic, giving trust
and competence in the sector.
Um, but also another part of it is ensuring
that we don't add additional regulatory barriers, um,
because these amazing organizations, we want them focused
and the the resources they have focused on doing great work.
So those are the two areas that I'm looking at.
Um, and, uh, I want to assure you that, um, I'm,
we'll have those conversations
with the ministers responsible for the tax settings, uh,
to ensure that we, we get the, get the balance right.
And I think it's, you know, um, the comments
that have been made may affect a very small
number of organizations.
Um, but you, you do want
to have confidence whether you are giving a little
or giving a lot that, um, there is integrity, uh,
and the settings are right, um,
because we want to encourage, um, people to give more.
So there look like there are, um, there is a, a,
a legitimate worry about rogue actions,
but it looks like those would really
fall under tax avoidance from what I can see.
Have you talked to the revenue minister about boosting the
work in that area so that people who are
misusing this are covered
by tax avoidance rather than everyone else paying the price
by changing the rules with regard to charities
And, and those are the, you know,
I'm not gonna speak on behalf of a colleague, um,
but really in terms of having a discussion document,
getting some initial thoughts, um, from a wide range
of organizations has
what has then will shape their thinking going forward.
Um, and, uh, you know, I, I think you are right in,
in your, uh, suggestion that it's a small number
of players rather than a widespread problem.
But the underlying issue remains, uh, we want New Zealanders
to have trust and confidence in the charitable sector, um,
so that we can grow giving, um, not, not reduce it.
So I'll just give you one more example from another
minister that really worried me.
It was the comments about charities
that were doing amazing work out there,
like North Shore Family Center,
and they were being described by Minister Short
as cash cows.
Did you have a talk to her about the realities of what
that would mean to a sector that does so much for so little
and produces value and describing people as cash cows?
Um, point of order, sorry. Um, point of order. Mr. Chair.
Um, I don't believe, oh,
can we please check if Minister Cho actually said the North
Shore Center is a
Cash cow? She said that
the, um,
that there were cash cows out there, and it's been, but
Not specifically at that center.
No, that's probably right. Location.
So I used it as an example.
It was one of the ones that lost its funding.
So one of the ones
that lost its funding was North Shore Women's Center.
And the, the reason that they lost their funding was seen as
that they were not as attached to children.
And there was a whole discu discussion about where
that funding, um, was being used
for other things were being held in the cha in the charity
and, and used in other areas.
So that was a discussion that went down.
And there has been an auditor General's report
that's scathing about this stuff.
So it has come out saying those were not
appropriate comments.
Did you talk
to those ministers about describing charities
in that, in those sorts of terms?
Uh, well, again, I, I think, um,
the members conflating a couple of different issues.
What I would say is, is the size
of this sector is significant.
So in terms of expenditure that goes
through charitable organizations not for profit, uh,
about $25 billion.
So we do want to ensure that there is trust
and confidence in the sector, uh,
and that when funds are given, um, they are used for
that purpose, that there aren't organizations
who are structuring themselves in a way, um, that are
to their advantage as opposed
to the charitable purpose in which they are there
to exist for.
Uh, and, and look, I I fully, um, accept that, uh,
you know, the social sector and the services that are
provided to New Zealand's, um, most vulnerable up
and down this country are, are provided by the sector.
Uh, and, and that's why I think this portfolio is
so important and my priorities are around supporting them
so that they can have greater impact.
Uh, what I don't want to see is a significant addition of
regulatory barriers and a regulatory burden,
because all that does is prevent their ability
to do the great work that we, that we know they do.
And, and one of the real advantages is often
these community organizations and,
and I think it is unfair in a situation like this to, um,
to name individual organizations.
So I won't be doing that,
but I'm sure as I sit here, every one of you can think about
a very local organization who is very connected
to the people who need their services the most.
And they are impactful because of that proximity.
They are trusted, um, and they do, uh, great work.
And because of the, the size
and, um, value, as I said, $25 billion, that,
that's a significant amount, uh, that we need to be aware of
and make sure that the trust
and confidence in the sector is, is maintained Ary morning.
Um, thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, Mr.
You mentioned philanthropic, um, giving, um,
and, um, Helen's mentioned it as well.
Um, so philanthropy New Zealand.
Where do you see that relationship with you going forward
and how do you, how do you plan if you are to build on
that relationship and the
therefore the coming back into those organizations,
the financial giving back to those organizations?
Um, so I, I've, I've been working, um, closely with them
and, uh, particularly in the area of growing,
philanthropic giving.
Um, we did a joint campaign, uh, in Christmas last year,
12 days of giving, um, which is all about profiling,
um, giving on a regular basis.
If you think about those very kind
of local community organizations, often
where the challenges is the bread and butter funding.
So New Zealanders are incredibly generous
with their time as volunteers.
We're also incredibly generous when it comes to a crisis.
Um, you know, an earthquake flooding the cyclone.
And so people give very generously then.
But many of those little organizations
that are really significant in our communities,
they actually struggle with the bread
and butter funding, which is where working
with philanthropy in New Zealand to see what else we can do
to lift giving across the board
and to make it, um, make people more aware
that it is the kind of regular, regular giving doesn't have
to be large, is really important.
And I've seen great examples at, for example, um,
the Commonwealth Volunteering Expo in Topo recently,
where one of the voluntary organizations
had a chart on the wall that says, you know, $4 a week
allows us to rescue this many kittens, um,
or, you know, for a cup of coffee a week that will enable us
to do, um, dex this many cats a year.
And so translating it so that people can see,
well actually I could donate $5 a week
and it would go a long way to that community organization.
That's important to me in my hometown.
Pollo Um, minister you mentioned
reducing the regulatory burden.
Um, what are you doing
to reduce the regulatory bur burden on our
community and voluntary sector?
Yeah, so one of the things I've been, uh, working on,
again with philanthropy New Zealand, is to look at
what are the, what are the significant ones?
Um, and I, I think part of where we are heading is
to look at can we simplify, uh, it for organizations, uh,
can we look at opportunities for
organizations to work together?
Because often what happens is, um, there's lots
of administrators in different community
organizations doing the same work.
So I, I am really encouraging organizations
to collaborate and work together.
Um, but it's also about ensuring that we don't, um, load
or add additional, uh, regulations.
Dunno if you want to, um, mention the, the changes
to the charities legislation recently
and how that's playing out in terms
of reduced time and effort.
Yes, I can speak to that minister.
So there was, um, amendments made
to the Charities Act in 2023, which, uh, now enforce.
And part of that was to reduce the
regulatory burden on charities.
So, uh, to reduce reporting obligations to make it easier,
uh, for them to report.
But we've put in place a whole range of tools
to support them when they turn into guidance, webinars, uh,
seminars, et cetera.
And we are monitoring that for the next two years.
So we'll see it over that cycle
of two years as to the real benefits.
But we're hearing very positive things from charities about
the, uh, reduced compliance.
Your question, Laura? Um, thank you Mr. Chair.
My question actually kind of follows on from that, um,
quite often we're hearing minister from the smaller
charities, look, we're volunteers.
We are not resourced
to do the administrative side of things.
It's really challenging and one of the things
that I hear quite often is
around like procuring government contracts, um, trying
to get into government, um, accessing funds
and things like that because they don't have the same sort
of wheelhouse as like a big large organization
that is sometimes charities as well.
Um, so really small community focused charities.
I'm wondering what kind of work is being done, um, in
that space to help, I guess,
are you doing any work in the procurement side of things,
um, to help, um, it be more accessible for the smaller kind
of charities to actually be able to tender
and win some of these awards?
'cause we know that some of them are local on the ground
and I like the idea about collaborating.
'cause some of them are just, you know, all going
for the same funds and stepping on each
other's toes in community too.
So we don't want that. But at the same time, I think, um,
we do want the money going right
to the communities that need it. So yeah,
Sometimes are small.
Yeah, I'd say, I'd say two things about that.
Uh, just firstly in terms of the, the,
the regulatory burden.
If you look at other pieces of work across government, um,
around changes to health
and safety, for example, um, that has often been an area
that small voluntary organizations,
whether they're organizing a fund run, fund run
or whatever, have said that health
and safety legislation has been a significant barrier.
And we've seen the end of some events
that have been significant fundraisers
for local organizations and local, uh, charities.
So, um, on, uh, a government perspective
that will, that will help.
Um, I guess one of the, one of the challenges
that we have in the, um, the procurement
or commissioning is, you know, we do, we do want to ensure
that organizations that are winning government contracts
or doing work, um, for government have, for example,
sufficient, um, ability to measure their impacts.
And some smaller organizations won't have the CAPA capacity
or capability to do that.
And that's where I think it's really important
to encourage them
to work alongside other charitable organizations
in their community.
So we are seeing co-location, we are seeing hubs,
we are seeing, um, joint contracts
where it might be, uh, an umbrella organization
with a specialized organization underneath it.
Uh, and I think that's really where we want
to head in the future so that your very specialized,
very local organization can provide that service.
Um, but that government has the, um, confidence
that the data capacity to report on income, uh, on impacts,
for example, and outcomes, uh, is, is available.
So it's getting that balance. Right.
Is there anything you'd add to that Paul?
Uh, minister, the only thing I'd add is we are really
conscious about in our grants systems, which is a bit more
of what DI operates in terms
of modern grant making practices
and how do you make it easier for, uh, groups to apply
for grants and also for groups who aren't familiar
of applying to government for grants.
Um, so removing barriers and trying to get more diversity
and accessibility into the grant funds.
So that's a real focus for us.
So Yeah, just, um, on the grants, um, schemes,
I understand that there was a review
that was basically underway about two years ago.
Where are you at with that review,
Like us to respond, Mr. Sure.
Um, so that's, um, a review
that runs across multiple portfolios, actually.
So both the CVS portfolio,
but also internal affairs portfolio,
which houses the lottery grants, uh, system.
So Claire, you might like to just provide an update to
The committee? Yeah, sure.
Um, uh, in the Crown funding space
for this portfolio, we, uh, had a look at what all
of the grants were, essentially what the, the outcomes
and the impacts of those grants.
And one of the main things that we did at, at that time was
to consolidate some of the smaller funds into one fund,
which enabled, uh, I guess a little bit
of flexibility in the funding,
but also it reduced the thing
that we hear a lot from community groups, which is
that there are so many different funding avenues.
How do I know which one is the right thing for us?
So much more heading towards the space which just come in
the door and we will, uh, support you to, um, apply
for whatever it is that actually you aspire to as a,
as a community group.
So that was one of the main things we did.
We're also been, uh, looking at
and implementing changes to the, to applications
to make it easier and using data to target, uh, groups
that aren't showing up in the data, um, so
that we can work towards a more equitable space
that's in the crown funding area.
Um, because the same people, uh,
in my group work alongside Crown funding, some trusts
and some all of the lottery funding.
Um, we have, uh,
when we're working alongside a community group,
we can be talking with them about any of those things.
Um, and in the lottery funding space, we have been, uh,
looking at the system from, from the top to the bottom
and looking to make it a lot easier for people to apply.
And then it talks a lot also to things like compliance and,
and when, when groups are, um, are, uh,
assuring us that they have spent the money on the things
that they applied to spend the money for, uh,
that we are looking at other reporting
that they might be doing so that they don't have
to duplicate the effort in those types of things.
New question.
Thank you. Apologies. I've had a, um, plane delayed.
Uh, just a primary here.
Just given the rise,
given the documented rise in online hate
and the increasing risk of harm to marginalized communities,
why has the minister chosen
to end both the preventing encountering violent extremism
fund and the Safer Communities funds both large contributing
factors resulting in a 27.6% cut.
And I just have three Supplementaries as well, Joseph.
Thank you.
Great. Um, thanks.
I I would just say that, um, the, the funds
that the member has mentioned, um, were, uh,
like project funds that were set up that were time limited,
uh, had a certain amount of funding that was allocated, um,
and like any time limited funding, um, that've kind
of exhausted the, the project that was initially set up, um,
and the purpose it was set up for at the time.
Okay. Thank you. And so does the minister accept
that defunding these initiatives could lead vulnerable
communities more exposed to targeted violence
and online hate without dedicated proactive support?
Yeah, so I, I would just correct the member.
It's not defunding it, it is the end of a project
or an initiative that was funded for a set period of time,
a set purpose, a set outcome, uh,
and once those funds have been distributed and the project
or initiative comes to the end of its time
IE the 30th of June 25, it is appropriate that, that, um,
it concludes at that time.
Thank you. And, um, what advice, if any,
did the minister receive on the long term impact of, um,
ending the, the ending of these projects and funding?
Um, was there any risk assessment undertaken?
Yeah, so, so the, the first thing I would say is, um,
this, this part of the Department of Internal Affairs, um,
kind of is responsible for the grant
and the distribution of the fund.
So it is a very small kind of function.
And I can give you an example.
So if you look at the Survivor Support
and Recognition fund, which is part of the, um,
government's response to the, um, Royal Commission, um,
of abuse and to state care.
Mm. As minister, I'm not responsible for that work program.
Um, but the Department of Internal Affairs holds this fund
while it's been created.
It has a purpose, it has a set time limit,
and it has a budget for, um, distribution.
So, uh, I think it just is useful to clarify, um,
that DIA's role or, um, the community
and voluntary sector within it is just a holder
and administrator of the fund to ensure it is distributed
in the timeframe and for the purpose it was created.
So, hang on.
Yeah. Thank you. Just to emphasize that minister, um,
those funds were both created following the mosque tax
and the Royal Commission report.
Uh, the funding decisions are made with the guidance of, uh,
a group of agencies, department of prime minister
and cabinet, the security agencies,
the New Zealand police, et cetera.
So our role very much is the administering agency.
So what we know about is how to organize
and run funding processes, but actually, uh, the intent
and purpose of the funds really comes from other portfolios
rather than ours. Thanks.
Oh, thank you so much. I, I guess I'm still concerned, um,
in terms of there is an increase in, um,
targeted online hate to absolutely arise in Islamophobia,
um, as well as other things in New Zealand.
So I wonder if the minister could commit
to reviewing the consequences of the ending
of these projects to ensure a funding pathway for any future
community led, um, resilience and safety programs.
Yeah, so, so just to, to reconfirm, what Paul has said is
that the decisions about, um, project funds
or initiative funds like this are made by other departments.
Um, when there is a, an an issue or a challenge
or an event, uh, like the horrendous, uh, MOS mosque attack.
Uh, and so a response was prepared at the time
by relevant ministers under, uh, recommendations from their
agencies that then created a fund.
The, the, the, the sole job, um, of the Department
of Internal Affairs CVS team is administering the fund
and responding to, uh, grant requests, assessing whether
that request, um, fits within the scope
that the fund was created and then dispersing the funds.
So, uh, it's, um, it, it's not a response for me
as the minister responsible for the community
and voluntary sector
and the administrator of these funds, uh, to determine,
uh, whether or not a new one should be
created or carried on.
I think, man, so I just add to really make that point too,
most of the funds in your portfolio that you administer,
they don't have a purpose beyond
what communities are looking for, cogs, et cetera.
So the communities make the choices.
These other funds that we administer on behalf
of other portfolios are different in nature
because there's a portfolio saying, actually we'd like
to achieve this, whereas your, uh,
objective is strong communities. Yes.
Um, Melissa, what is the value of philanthropic giving
and, um, why are you prioritizing?
Yeah, so, um, as I said,
New Zealand is incredibly generous in volunteering.
Um, I think 53% of New Zealanders volunteer their time.
Uh, and what I would like to see is, um,
an equal focus on people donating, um,
resources in terms of funding.
Uh, it also, you know, kind
of binds people into the wellbeing
and benefits of an impact of their local community.
Uh, and so that's where I see growing philanthropic giving
as important, um, across the board at an individual level,
at an enterprise level.
Um, and where, you know, we are seeing an increase of,
you know, larger philanthropic organizations
where that is their purpose.
Um, and so we also want to ensure
that we maximize their impact.
And what we are seeing is a growing, um, need
to invest earlier.
And so there's some real kind of interest in the work,
for example, that the Minister
of Social Investment is doing, um,
to create greater opportunities to invest earlier,
to have even greater impact than, um,
philanthropic organizations have, uh, today.
I think that's the time we have available
for this, um, appropriation.
We'll now move to the next one. Thank you.
Which is the estimate to office later to the independent
better responsibility.
Oh, look at that.